# VaincreLeMonde: improving the world one person at a time
### "Winning at life beins with the internal compass, and how well we keep it clean and fine-tuned so that it can help navigate us through any challange."

This project is a collection of stuff designed to help me to hear, recognize, understand, and follow the guiding influence of the universe. I believe that understanding this guidance is the key to unlocking unlimited power in our lives. I'm certain that the better one understands the universe, the better they fair at life. This is about learning to live an inspired life.

## The "Aha!" Moments & Genius

What is inspiration or the ***"Aha!"*** moments --the flashes of revelatory epiphany-- that are studied in academia? It usually requires one to have an "Aha!" momemnt to finialy understand a particularly difficult math or science problem. And though a thoroughly academic study might shy away from calling these "Aha!" moments "guidance from God" or even the universe, I'm convinced that calling it such is helpful in making these moments more common. And as the research suggest that the more common the epiphanies, the more genius level thinking occurs. 

The word **'Genius'** itself comes from the Greek spirit said to communicate with men to help them achieve greatness. My goal with all of this here is to create the optimal conditions for that "seed" of revelation to sprout. Since like a seed these revelatory moments can't be forced to sprout or grow, but we can improve conditions to make that growth more likely.

## The Struggle of the First Step

I’ve often been paralyzed by what the [first step](/training/WhereToStart.md) (or next step) should be. Yet through the process I've realized a number of things:
1. **Focus on Fundimentals:** I think that probably a large majority of people struggle with energy issues often resorting to artificial sources of energy like sugar and caffeine or even more powerful drugs. And I believe a lot of that has to do with the difficulty in just trying to continue to go through the motions of life when everything seems to keep piling up. But perhaps the real answer is more about coming back to ground level and finding purpose (which would be like patching a whole in a tire before pumping it full of air, instead of continuously pumping and hoping for things to change).
2. **Movement Matters:** After we find that purpose, that core value worth fighting for, taking a step itself is more important than trying to find an exact direction. Building up a momentum that can help cary you through challanges, when life gets tough, is an encreadible skill to develop and master.
3. **Turning Vices into Virtues:** An important step that might go before the others, or may be a part of the Fundimentals mentioned earlier is recognizing that there are two basic streams of influence and direction: one of corruption, death, and darkness based on selfishness; the other of growth, life, and light based on love. (Or rather one of trying to consume more than you produce (darkness) vs one of trying to produce more than you consume (light).)

These "steps" currently align with my model of the [TowerIAm](/training/TheTowerIAm.md) (though not necisarily in that same order), where we need to separate ourselves from the vices and pernicious distractions to better develop and grow virtues that will help us to grow and become more of the best selves that we are and should become. Also along the lines of receiving revelation and treating genius like a seed, growth is more likely the better we prepare the ground for it to grow and the better we are at taking action and moving forward.

The basic understanding of choosing growth over decay (or of nuturing vs pure consumption) is a good first metric in being able to see that you are growing and becoming something more. While I am still working on metrics and learning models to insure progress as opposed to just spinning wheels, I have created a section on goals to try and help facilitate finding and focusing on a destination worth going to as well as tools to help keep one on track. There are so many distractions and obsticles in life that finding purpose, goals, and direction as well as keeping track of them can all by themselves make a dramatic difference in life.

### The Purpose of this is Open Source Learning
Until I can create a website that does better at facilitating open discussion and learning (where everyone is both a teacher and student and we learn and grow together), the format of github seems to be a good place to start this open learning model. The way that open learning with source code is facilitated with the git model is impressive, and I hope to grow from this base to something even more useful when it comes to more general knowledge and instruction. I do appreciate sites and learning programs like https://oercommons.org/, https://www.ck12.org/teacher/, https://owl.purdue.edu/, https://oli.cmu.edu/, https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks, https://alison.com/, https://wisconsinliteracy.org/, and https://germanna.edu/degrees-programs/tuition-free-degrees (maybe I'll try to create a more complete list or list of lists of open and free learning) I would also like to improve upon these wherever possible to promote a continuous open education. I would like this to eventually be the ultimate tool (or collection of tools) for continuous self/team improvement.

I also want to focus here on that learning which is most important. I currently think that [Foundational Understanding](/training/GnosticIniversalism/README.md) is a good start to that. I want this to be as open, accessible, and accepting as is possible and of as much genuine help as it can be.

#### How to use this:
As you look through each of the folders and files and look at what is currently here to help with self/team improvement please give me feedback on what is helpful and what isn’t as well as ideas that you might have on your process for improvement and what tools you use, or would like to have that help you to grow. The way building and improving in github works is through the issue tracker: https://github.com/scott-rogers2008/VaincreLeMonde/issues feel free to add to the issues that are tracked if you have a free github membership or email me at scott.rogers2008@gmail.com.

Let’s work together to revolutionize the education system so that everyone can unlock and harness their inner genius and continual growth is always sought and not something to graduate from. Let's help continue the process of making it more available to more people and help pull together those things that would make the world a better place for everyone in it.

### The title -- Vancre Le Monde 
I got from this talk (https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/general-conference/2022/10/47nelson?lang=eng) -- I think it sounds cooler in French.  And I love how the idea of conquering the world by first conquering one’s self is as old as time. Plato once said that the conquering of oneself was the first and most important victory. In Eastern traditions the conquering of oneself is the alchemy of soul and the ultimate path for mastering anything and found throughout all of Buddhism, Taoism, Confucius teachings, etc.  There isn’t a religion or school of thought that doesn’t recognize the importance of self-mastery. I think that this is a great foundation upon which we can all build together.

