# The Close Personal Nature of Revelation

I have written and rewritten this and want it to be as clear and accessible as possible. There are a number of studies that show that self-awareness is the strongest predictor of overall success, and that more than 80% of people highly overestimate their ability for self-awareness. It looks like it’s primarily only those in high-level leadership that are particularly made aware of this importance. I am all too painfully aware of the Dunning-Kruger effect and the confirmation bias and how these can taint even our surveys and the way that we collect and analyze data making it difficult to know almost anything for certainty. Dr. Eurich’s studies into the “Introspection Illusion,” like the Dunning-Kruger model, are useful in knowing that we probably aren’t as good as we think we are at knowing our strengths and knowing the limits of our strengths. But I think that she failed to take into account the echo-chamber effect in the way that she looked at getting feedback to improve and/or verify self-perception.

I think that it’s probably best to start with Descartes’ most basic kernel of truth, “I exist.” While the exact nature and extent of that existence seems to be debatable, forming various families of thought, that small kernel seems to hold true for everyone. I can’t see any value or reason for any person to doubt their own existence -- while there are some types of emotional abuse that might generate that kind of doubt, I hope that it doesn’t happen and isn’t studied. I believe that starting there gives us better access to what life is and what possible meanings it might have, since it may very well be the only kernel of thought that is as undisputed as it is. Solipsism goes so far as to argue that it’s the only truly knowable thing.

I think that next in the list of undeniable truths is that there is some universe or environment in which I exist. I exist and there is some environment that I exist in that might or might not be wholly distinct from myself. There is at least a cognitive distinction from the me and the not-me in my thoughts and perceptions; the thoughts and perceptions that I have and experience are not too difficult to contrast from those entities with which I am having those experiences and at least appear to be separate from my cognitive thought apart from my perceptions and interactions with them. So there is at least a perceived notion of “me” and “other”.  While this might not be a part of solipsism or the ontological-idealism that has been argued by some, it seems to be a very basic truth, almost as undeniable as the truth of our own existence. 

So why do I think it’s important to enter into this heady space of thought that might border on the side of over-analysis and navel-gazing? I’m hoping that it gives us a better insight into why and how our connection with actual knowledge is so tenuous:  why it’s so easy to not actually know what we think we know. 
This mushy existence of perception and interaction with “other(s)”, the fact that it is more easy than we may realize to doubt the value of others,  is what Ralph Barton Perry calls the ego-centric predicament (https://archive.org/details/jstor-2011576/page/n1/mode/2up). It is what David Foster Walce called the water of life, and gives rise to what he calls the default setting that he urges us to rise above (https://fs.blog/david-foster-wallace-this-is-water/).  I think it’s important to explore the concept of what one really knows until they get to this point and realize as Socrates that "The only true wisdom is in knowing you know nothing," and how very real that actually is. Or as Moses put it, “... Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed.” Moses 1:10.

It is depressing to me the extent to which so many so-called Christians live in that ego-centric water without much of an attempt to escape and be more. I call out Christianity because I don’t know of any other religious groups that claim as much religiosity, and have such religious fervor, without holding to the basic tenets of their own religion as much as Christians do.

I think that the next in the list of indisputable facts is that there is a God, but this is so expertly veiled as to make it one of the most disputed ideas. All efforts to rigorously prove the existence of God let alone the divine nature of His revelations to us have proven to be very difficult if not impossible. And being that any all-powerful being could, if he wanted, make such a thing indubitable, beyond even the possibility of doubt, shows me that if such a being exists, that He encourages us to question that existence. So we have an opportunity to take it as a personal challenge and try to know who He is. I think we can, no matter where are in life, start by equating Him with the It, the all of existence which turns out to be less doubtable than even the I. It turns out to be a lot harder to doubt that anything exists, since here we are having experiences, so there must be something even if it’s the something related to the illusion of everything. There is this It of existence that is very hard to ignore. And understanding It and our relationship to It is probably more important than anything other knowledge we can obtain.

If there is a God, a He that is so integrally connected with all of the It that It doesn’t operate outside of the bounds of what He allows, He doesn’t mind us questioning His existence, in fact if He exists then He certainly designed the world, the universe, in such a way that encourages us to find out for ourselves in a way that is uniquely and personally our own. We are all enabled to decide for ourselves if we don’t believe that there is any meaning to life or the universe, that it is all just random chance, and behave accordingly if we so choose. For some people the assigning a God to the It of existence overly mystifies our existence, and there may be a fair amount of truth to that. There are probably people both historical and present that overly mystify God. There are certainly those that have and do use the idea of God for personal gain. If there is a God then, what does this tell us about Him? Perhaps this is also something that He would have us come to learn on our own, but I think it’s clear that He doesn’t need recognition and/or praise, that He’s even willing to be hated or despised. I think it also means that there is a strong possibility that the words, “I am a jealous God” aren’t accurately His (at the very least, not the way those words are used today).

I am certain that God does live and that He wants us to find him for ourselves. In fact I am certain that the way our existence is in this life is such that we don’t know anything as much as we know God and ourselves. That he is so completely and fully in and through all of the “other”  with His infinite knowledge and power, that everything we experience is part of something that He is trying to say. While His methods might feel at times like an infinitely painful game of hide and seek or hot and cold, I believe that a deeper understanding of the way He is in and through all things in our lives helps us to recognize who God is and what He wants from us and for us. We don’t have to see God in every aspect of our lives but when we do it can add a richness to life that one cannot experience any other way. It makes it easier to ask the “what” questions of introspection that help us to become better. Regardless of our choice to see God in the details, our entirely frog’s-eyed, soda straw perspective does give us a detailed introspection of ourselves. I was introduced to how our lives provide deep introspection of our own character through Hugh Nibley’s presentation at BYU of Zeal without Knowledge, where he paints the structure of time, our minds, and how we perceive the world as the perfect test of priorities, a way in which we are proved. How we choose to see others, how we choose to see the universe, how we choose to interact with others and the world around us, it all says a great deal about who we are choosing to be.
In a way not totally unlike Nibley, David Foster Wallace in his commencement speech for Kenyon College in 2005, This is Water presented a very similar idea. The soupy, self-centered perception that we have of life, gives us the opportunity to be selfish or rise above it. We can choose to understand with loving kindness the tendency others have for ego-centric behavior or to respond in kind holding tightly to our own selfish interests. If, or when, there are children, teenagers, or even adults, that have recognized that every experience they have had up until this point has constantly held them at the center of their universe, and they choose to act in a way that reflects that viewpoint, we need not be surprised. This is water, or the ubiquity of the experiences that we are all swimming in throughout our whole lives. Though some of us get better at empathy than others, it does not come without effort and there remains an impenetrable barrier that we cannot cross no matter how hard we might try. There are some things that we need to just leave to God and the Universe to handle and trust He knows what He is doing.

I think I should pause here, and focus a little attention on a dangerous truth: that one can ignore God, humanity, everything and just focus on what they want. With the mere realization that there are distractions in life, and along with the realization that if one can overcome these distractions and focus, that such a person can get more out of life. This is an eternal truth that will benefit all that apply it (the dangerous truth being that you don’t have to believe in God or even any form of goodness to have this level of “success”).  “There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated— And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated.” (Doctrine and Covenants 130:20-21). The fact that a person is more likely to reach an objective through focus, and not being distracted, is a truth so fundamental that I don’t think I need any sources or references to back it up. And some people, realizing this truth have then asked, “So why do I need to believe in God?” or “Why do I need to care about others?”

The dangerous aspect of the truth should also be acknowledged (both that it’s true and that it’s dangerous): people frequently don’t know what they need and what will bring them happiness. Some are slow to recognize their own misery, through the help of self-medication and distractions people are able to live in a diluted sense of happiness for a long time before realizing that none of it is actually real. Some of the most unhappy people in the world are those that have found “success” by manifesting it, focusing on just what they want. I think that one of the reasons we need to recognize and acknowledge their accomplishments and their rewards is to help them and also to receive their help. This also helps us to get a more complete understanding of the God that doesn’t require anyone to believe in Him to have this measure of success. Life isn’t about what He’ll allow, it seems like He will allow almost anything and some people are bull headed enough to go down that dilutional path of “what can I get away with”, because it can look deceivingly attractive, and it can look like they are indeed “getting away with it”. Life and happiness are found in doing good, helping others, making lasting friendships that lift and encourage, but we have to overcome our ego-centric perspective and let go of so many things that we think we want or need. It’s hard.

Many of these people, those that have sacrificed their humanity for wealth, have realized that giving back to society has helped to ease their conscience. And many who have judged them, coveted their wealth or power, and tried to take it from them by other means have not proved to be any more righteous, successful, or happy. I think that we can take it as a sign from God that if God is all powerful and not corrupt, that he might actually want us to learn how to do the same: have power and/or money and stay free from corruption. I want us to do better at working together with that understanding, as opposed to believing that money itself is inherently evil.  I believe that both of the views: “if they are rich they must be good”, and “if they are rich they must be evil”, are erroneous and cause more harm than good.  I think that in the past thousands of years of Judeo-Christianity have shown the harms of both extremes of thought. I think that there are enough examples of both that we can choose for ourselves how we interact with this concept of greed and selfishness. I think that corruption is giving in to the ego-centric or default setting, and that overcoming this corruption makes for better lives, better communities, and better nations.

Along these lines I would like to proceed with Adam Smith’s “enlightened self-interest” and John Nash’s “Nash Equilibrium” as they apply to success and achievement. In terms of the balance between altruism and supporting one’s self, Joseph Smith talked about giving in terms of “not running faster than one is able” (which I think means that it is ok and necessary to take care of oneself, especially when trying to help others). Having already set in place that there is a large extent to which God will not stop us from following our own ambition as well as the clear truth that ambition, wealth, and power do not bring happiness I think that the “Nash Equilibrium" is good next step, though it might not be an adequate theologically based explanation of Jacob’s “And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted.” (Jacob 2:19) It is, indeed, in our best interest as stated by Adam Smith to consider the well being of others, and as Nash proves, there is an equilibrium that improves our state over that of a purely selfish zero sum approach. When we not only consider but help others with their wants and needs I believe we can reach a better, happier equilibrium. Jesus’s words, “love your neighbor as yourself,” can be described as a divine equilibrium. While the Nash Equilibrium can be effectively used to optimize one’s wealth, we can look beyond that to the divine equilibrium to find a better balance and happiness in life, but this is a balance that one can only find in one’s personal interaction with God through the soupy mush of our own perspective and experiences. As Elder Eyering presented in his BYU speech “A Law of Increasing Returns” as we give first class and accept coach, our lives are increasingly more likely to be filled with joy and happiness as we lean into altruism even if that joy and happiness is delayed to a life after this life. He also states that giving so much that our spouses and families are miserable is probably not a good place to search for the proper balance and encourages us to find that point of equilibrium for ourselves. Arthur C. Brook, a wonderful example of Catholic excellence, in 2009 shared with BYU students a talk entitled, “Why Giving Matters.” In this talk he shared his academic studies that proved that Rockefeller could indeed be correct when he stated that God gave him money, and that he wouldn’t be so rich if he didn’t give. The Nash Equilibrium can also give us some insight on the side of “altruism” that might be perhaps more like enabling than real, sustainable help and improvement. It might help us find a better equilibrium where we’re not giving so much that it is objectively detrimental to ourselves.

How do we find the balance of true and lasting happiness? How do we commune with God and pull down the very powers of heaven on our behalf? If our lives are a constant personal conversation with God, what is He trying to tell us?

The idea that our whole life is a deeply personal conversation with God may be a revolutionary idea to some. In Doctrine and Covenants 121:33 it states “As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.” The idea that it could apply as well to any infidel as it would saint, might be a revolutionary idea even to many Latter-day Saints. But the idea that members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or Christians, or any religion, don’t hold a monopoly on goodness is not new. And while the term “Latter-day Saint” may be copyrighted, the church does do a lot to encourage everyone to know, feel, and understand that they everyone is a loved and cherished child of God, and that this means that He is doing his best to talk to and show his love to all of humanity. The idea that this is “the water” of our existence is not new, even if this particular presentation of it is new. Some of it may be easier to see through the lens of Taoism, which talks about letting the flow of existence work in and through you, though I think traditional Taoist philosophy is more of non-action than using action as a multiplier effect to bring more good into the world. A Wiccan type view of understanding and connecting with the energy of the universe might also bring helpful insight into connecting with our personal universe of “other”, and how we can draw on that power and commune with it. Having this dynamic insight and how these other views connect with one’s own beliefs can bring further insight into understanding oneself, God, and their connection with everything.

On the other side of this potentially revolutionary idea, is that it might not feel like God is revealing as much to me as He is to others.  At times when we desperately want something more concrete, the passive way that God is always there might feel like He’s not there or doesn’t care when it really matters to me. And when we compare the way that God talks with us to the dramatic light show that Joseph Smith received, as was recorded as his first vision, or others around us that may seem to be getting everything that we want, we might feel slighted or less than worthy. I love how Elder Alexander Dushku approached these types of concerns in his April 2024 General Conference address “Pillars and Rays” and how if we recognize and treasure all of the small moments with God, they can add up to an amazing bright and shining pillar in our lives.

In terms of growing one’s ability for revelation, I also really appreciate Elder David A. Bednar’s April 2011 General Conference address “The Spirit of Revelation” has similarities to Elder Dushku’s 2024 address. In the way Elder Bednar describes it, the light of our understanding grows gradually. Sometimes there are flashes of inspiration, where it’s like we can see everything all at once and very clearly, but frequently that light grows more gradually.
And the personal aspect of revelation, where our whole lives are just one big conversation with Got, is highlighted in Elder D. Todd Christofferson’s April 2021 General Conference talk “Why the Covenant Path” especially where he talks about this “straight and narrow path” being so narrow that there’s just one person, to make their individual and personal covenants with God.  How that covenant path is such a personal one-on-one conversation, walking with God, is exemplified when we understand that this is the core of our life experience.

This personal connection with the heavens is also closely connected to the idea of genius. The term genius comes from Greek, where it was the name of the spirit that inspires men or groups to greatness. And in mathematics and sciences in particular but in all studies in general there is an academic understanding of the “Aha!” phenomenon that has strong similarities to the LDS understanding of revelation. The general idea being that such things as getting the answers we want can’t be forced any more than a seed can be forced to sprout and grow, but we can prepare and make the conditions ideal for the seed. I believe that even the statement common in LDS culture, “what is given by revelation is best understood by revelation” can also be applied to every aspect of knowledge or skill. Since as I have proposed, all of life can be considered revelation, or a constant communication with God, the better we understand God and the way He is talking to us, the better we can understand all things. As Moses said, “Oh that all of God’s people would be prophets,” this appears to be the desire of God Himself. In Jesus' own words, “Be ye therefore perfect even as your father in heaven is perfect” reveals that we are to use this personal connection with God to learn to become more like Him, divine. As we follow the directions He gives, as we covenant to follow His path and continue down that covenant path we understand Him better, receive great light and understanding in our lives, and are of greater help to those around us.
